The overall pipeline is shown in Figure . We employ a multi-view 3DGS teacher network to provide geometric supervision, novel views to provide photometric supervision, and an extrapolator network to complete the missing context. In the multi-view 3DGS, we have sparse-view images , ( ) and their corresponding camera projection matrices , where , and are the intrinsic, rotation, and translation matrices. A multi-view 3DGS model , where is the number of views, maps images to 3D Gaussian parameters using On the other hand, the relaxed version, the single-view 3DGS model , performs the following: Unlike the multi-view 3DGS model, the single-view 3DGS model is more prone to scale ambiguity and extrapolation issues. To train our studentSplat, we use both geometric and photometric supervisions: The following sections will explain how we address these issues and design each loss function. The aim of the teacher-student model is to solve the scale ambiguity problem during training time to enable single-view 3DGS for the student model with valid 3D geometric structure. Unlike their multi-view counterparts, a single-view model only accepts one view, making it difficult for the model itself to estimate the correct relative scale without cross-view feature matching and triangulation. Using the teacher model geometric supervision. Unlike previous approaches , we do not have access to ground truth 3D annotations. Despite the lack of 3D annotations, during training time, multiple views are provided, and cross-view feature matching can be performed to estimate the Gaussian center for each pixel in the context view with an implicit relative scale . Thus, using the teacher model , we can convert the dateset from to . Then, in addition to the photometric loss computed from the target view , we supervise the student model's Gaussian center predictions using the teacher's Gaussian centers : , where is the L1 loss. Regularizing local structure consistency. The L1 loss used in lacks consideration of the local structure which is prone to distortions in the less confident region such as the boundaries between the in- and out-of context region. To construct good 3D Gaussians and minimize distortions, we also need to encourage consistency in the local structure. Following previous work that matches the depth map gradients to the ground truth depth map, we match the gradients of the teacher and student Gaussian centers using . Unlike previous work that defines the depth difference between nearby pixels as the gradient map (i.e., only the value is used for gradient computation), we propose a new definition of gradient that uses the 3D Euclidean distance (i.e., all , , and values are used for gradient computation) between nearby pixels as the gradient to accommodate 3D structure. This new definition is better aligned with 3D gradient matching. Discussion. The teacher model estimates only the relative scale, and consequently, the student model operates on the same relative scale. The teacher model will not be used at inference time. Therefore, we only require one input view, in other words, we relax the requirement for multiple input views and their corresponding camera poses, to perform the 3D reconstruction, which greatly improves the generalizability. More importantly, the resulting model naturally works as a single-view depth estimation model, connecting the 3D reconstruction task to single-view vision tasks, which goes beyond the capabilities of the teacher model. Unlike multi-view scenarios where the photometric novel view reconstruction loss can be formulated using interpolation only (i.e., enclosing the novel camera view inside the context camera view frustums), single-view 3D reconstruction inevitably needs to extrapolate when computing the novel view reconstruction loss. This extrapolation can lead to distortion in the extrapolating region as there is no direct visual information. In the case of 3DGS, some 3D Gaussians will be forced to cover the extrapolation region to minimize the photometric loss, which compromises the geometric validity. Extrapolating the missing context. Although the teacher supervision will encourage the Gaussian centers to represent valid geometric shapes, the missing region will create a large photometric loss, which encourages spurious relationships. To minimize this unnecessary photometric loss, we need to either mask out the missing context during loss computation or fill the extrapolating region with additional pixels to avoid noisy gradient flow. We select the latter approach to achieve two functionalities: 1) guide the photometric loss to the correct Gaussians to minimize spurious relationships, and 2) perform extrapolation on the missing context to improve the novel-view reconstruction. We repurpose techniques from to achieve these functionalities. Instead of directly supervising the rasterized novel view , we further process the novel-view reconstructions through a network and supervise the output using the photometric loss , where is the L2 loss and is the Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity computed using VGG features. Using composition to guide gradient flows. Directly applying will prevent the rasterizer from getting direct supervision, which can harm the reconstruction quality. The ideal situation is to separate the missing context and the visible context using a confidence weight matrix and treat their losses differently, but this separation is unknown before obtaining the 3D reconstruction. However, we can estimate the missing context using alpha compositing of the 3DGS. More specifically, we construct by composing the . Intuitively, the missing context is less visible and has lower whereas the visible context should have . We compose the novel view as , where . Then, we can guide the gradients computed from for the missing context to the extrapolation network, but the gradients for the context to the rasterizer, and the rasterizer always gets direct supervision from the reconstruction loss. Additionally, the existence of allows the student model to balance between the completeness and the confidence of the reconstruction by generating lower opacity for the regions with less confidence, since can still fill the less opaque area to minimize the loss. On the other hand, cannot collapse to zero, as will not be able to fill anything without context. Finally, the learned can be used during inference to identify the missing context. Discussion. Better extrapolation networks, such as diffusion-based methods , can be applied to achieve better novel-view reconstruction quality, but they make the training pipeline more complicated. We choose a feed-forward network (i.e., a pre-trained GAN network) to match the base training pipeline and preserve efficiency. The main goal of the extrapolator here is to direct the gradient flow to minimize artifacts. The ability to learn is more important than generating the best extrapolation result; as long as some level of extrapolation can be achieved and the learned context mask is accurate, we can apply more elaborate extrapolation methods, such as differential diffusion , during inference using the generated context mask. We visualize in the Appendix . Because of the introduction of the extrapolator, we can use the student network to produce additional views by providing fake camera poses. This way, assuming the teacher model performs better than the student model, we can use the teacher model to process the student model's output views to further improve the reconstruction result. This setting is detailed in the Appendix .