Given multi-view images for a scene and a target number of Gaussians , we aim to predict, in a feed-forward manner, a set of 3D Gaussian primitives that maximizes the rendering quality. Our proposed EcoSplat controls the per-view number of predicted 3D Gaussian primitives by ranking and selecting the most informative primitives in each view, ensuring that the set of selected primitives meets the target primitive number . To accomplish this, we adopt a two-stage optimization process: (i) The first stage is Pixel-aligned Gaussian Training (PGT) (Sec. ) where we train our model to predict pixel-aligned Gaussians, similar to prior works ; (ii) The second stage is Importance-aware Gaussian Finetuning (IGF) (Sec. ) where our model is further trained to predict the Gaussian parameters (opacities, 3D covariances, and colors) adaptively based on the target primitive number , enabling effective ranking and selection of important Gaussians. Specifically, we inject as a conditioning signal into our model. Adaptive to , EcoSplat suppresses the opacities of less important Gaussians in the pixel-aligned set, allowing the most informative ones to be retained. This process ensures the final output can be obtained by directly preserving the Gaussian primitives with the -highest opacity scores, which are called `top- Gaussians'. For inference (Sec. ), we describe our procedure, which satisfies the target primitive number by allocating per-view Gaussian counts based on the importance of each view to maximize the rendering quality. In the PGT stage, we train a pixel-aligned feed-forward 3DGS model whose architecture is built on the recent methods . Each view image is tokenized into tokens. These tokens are then processed independently by a shared ViT encoder to produce encoded tokens. The encoded tokens from all views are then fed jointly to a ViT decoder composed of decoder blocks. This decoder applies cross-attention to aggregate multi-view information into a unified scene representation. The output of the decoder for the -th view consists of multiple decoded tokens , where each , with denoting the per-token channel dimension, is extracted from the -th decoder block. These decoded tokens are fed into a Gaussian center head and a Gaussian parameter head , which predict the 3D centers and all remaining parameters of the pixel-aligned Gaussians for the -th view, respectively, as: where , , , and represent the 3D center, opacity, 3D covariance, and color, respectively, of the 3D Gaussian corresponding to the -th pixel in the -th view. denotes a feature map extracted from the input image via a shallow CNN layer that acts as a low-level feature encoder. Using the predicted pixel-aligned Gaussians, derived from all input images, we render a target novel view image via rasterization with its corresponding camera. To train our model, we compute the rendering loss as the sum of the MSE and LPIPS losses, averaged across all target novel views as: Our EcoSplat mitigates the redundancy of pixel-aligned prediction, where the total number of generated primitives grows linearly with both the number of input views and the image resolution, leading to inefficient rendering. In the IGF stage, we aim to make our model aware of the target primitive number , enabling it to adaptively predict the parameters of the pixel-aligned 3D Gaussians. For this, we finetune the Gaussian parameter head to adaptively suppress the opacities of less important primitives, while simultaneously optimizing and to maximize rendering quality. We inject a learnable importance embedding , which is derived from the target primitive number , into the intermediate feature of . Then, predicts the adjusted per-view pixel-aligned 3D Gaussian parameters as: where denotes the adjusted Gaussian parameters. To predict , we compute the preservation ratio from as and broadcast to an tensor, and feed it into a shallow CNN layer. Note that is set to a uniform value for all views during training, while it is computed individually for each view during inference to maximize the rendering quality (Sec. ). In the IGF stage, the ViT encoders/decoders and the Gaussian center head are kept frozen as shown in Fig. . Importance Mask Generation. To adaptively finetune with respect to , we aim to generate a pseudo ground truth (pseudo-GT) 2D importance mask for each view. This can be inferred from the set of important 3D Gaussians that should be retained. The importance mask generation process is divided into three steps, as follows: 1) Binary Variation Map Generation: First, we compute a variation map for that captures both photometric and geometric complexities at each pixel. The photometric variation map is computed as the gradient magnitude of : where denotes the L2-norm. To compute the geometric variation map , we obtain a depth map from the predicted means of the pixel-aligned 3D Gaussians and compute its corresponding normal map . Then, is computed from as: The final variation map is the average of the two variation maps, . We then binarize , where is the variation value at the -th pixel location, to obtain a binary variation map as: where denotes the -th quantile. Here, indicates high-variation pixels and othewise. 2) Important Gaussians Collection: Using the obtained binary variation map , we select the set of important 3D Gaussians. We partition the predicted pixel-aligned 3D Gaussians from using into two sets of 3D Gaussians: Intuitively, high-variation pixels should be represented by individual primitives to preserve fine reconstruction details. Therefore, we fully include within the set of important 3D Gaussians , as . Next, we reduce the redundancy in the low-variation set by merging its Gaussians using single-step K-means clustering. We first partition the input image into non-overlapping patches. Within the low-variation set , we designate the Gaussian associated with the first (top-left) pixel of each patch as a key Gaussian. The centers of these key Gaussians serve as cluster centroids. We then run single-step K-means clustering over to compute the final compact set . This procedure reduces redundancy while preserving local structure, yielding a smaller, faithful set of Gaussians for subsequent processing. The final set is computed as: 3) Important Gaussians Projection: The per-view importance mask is generated by projecting the 3D centers of all Gaussians in onto the -th image plane. This results in a binary mask where pixels intersected by any projected center are set to 1, and all other pixels are set to 0. Loss Function. The model needs to learn suppressing the opacity of less important Gaussians while retaining those of more important Gaussians. For this, we introduce an importance-aware opacity loss that encourages to match the importance mask using a binary cross-entropy (BCE) loss as: Finally, unlike the PGT stage, we only use the top- Gaussians to render a target novel view image via rasterization. The rendering loss is then computed as (similar to Eq. ): The total loss is computed as . Based on this total loss, our model is trained to predict an optimal set of primitives that maximizes rendering quality while adhering to the target primitive number . Progressive Learning on Gaussian Compaction (PLGC). It is important to stably train our model such that it can be robust to meet a wide range of target primitive numbers . A naive approach for this is to randomly select values over the entire training process. However, we found that this can lead to unstable training. To mitigate this, we propose a progressive learning strategy that expands the sampling range of depending on the current training iteration. Specifically, we define the sampling interval as , where the upper bound is fixed to . is gradually annealed from down to according to: where denotes the current iteration, is the decay interval, and is the decay rate. At each iteration, is randomly sampled from the interval . This sampling strategy allows the m