Given a sequence of sparse-view images , where each image has dimensions , and the corresponding camera projection matrices are . The goal of the generalizable 3DGS task is to learn a network that maps images to 3D Gaussian parameters. This process is defined as: where is a feed-forward network with learnable parameters . The parameters , , , and are the Gaussian mean, opacity, covariance, and color, respectively. Since Gaussian means are difficult to predict directly, most existing methods estimate them by unprojecting a depth map into 3D. The depth estimation scheme is as follows: First, the input image sequence is processed using a multi-view feature extraction backbone, resulting in a downsampled feature . Then, the cost volume is computed based on , the camera projection matrices , for different views, and the depth candidates . Specifically, the feature from view is warped to view as follows: where denotes the warp operator. The correlation is then computed as the dot product between and : where and denotes the feature channel dimension. Subsequently, is refined with a U-Net and upsampled to the input resolution as . Finally, a function is applied to obtain the probability of each candidate depth, and the final depth map is computed as their weighted average. To achieve high-quality 3D reconstruction, an accurate depth map is crucial since it determines the centers of 3D Gaussians. However, this commonly used method only relies on a single cross-view warp to compute feature similarity, underutilizing cross-view geometry and often leading to unreliable, coarse depth estimates. In addition, this typical correlation computation method requires storing all the dense warping features, which incurs significant memory overhead, especially when the depth candidate size is large. In this paper, we propose IDESplat to iteratively boost the feature similarity measure using multiple warp operations. As IDESplat progressively mines geometric cues to identify high-probability potential depth candidates, it can produce refined and reliable depth probability estimation results for precise Gaussian mean prediction. Warp-Index Epipolar Attention. The warp operation is key to constructing the cost volume or epipolar attention map, as it establishes pixelwise correspondences between features in the source and target views. However, as shown in Eq. , this warping operation requires sampling target-view features for each depth candidate, thereby incurring high memory cost. To alleviate the inherent memory overhead, we introduce a Warp-Index Epipolar Attention mechanism that only stores warp indices for similarity matrix multiplication. We first compute the warping index map as follows: where represents the operation that only records the indices obtained during warping, and is the depth candidate matrix. Next, we compute the feature correlations in parallel as follows: where denotes the Sparse Matrix Multiplication (SMM), which uses the warp index to determine the position in for matrix multiplication with . Then, we refine the correlation map with a lightweight 2D U-Net to obtain . Finally, a is applied along the depth dimension to obtain the attention weights: This attention map corresponds to the depth probability results of view for different depth candidates in a single estimation. Depth Probability Boosting Strategy. In each depth probability boosting unit, we stack Warp-Index Epipolar Attention layers to produce depth probability estimation results. To combine these isolated estimated outputs for stronger depth estimation capability, we propose a depth probability boosting strategy. Specifically, we initialize the depth probability matrix as an all-ones matrix and compute the subsequent updates as follows: where and denotes row-wise normalization. represents the depth probability matrix generated by the -th Warp-Index Epipolar Attention in the current depth probability boosting unit. Depth candidates with consistently high probabilities across layers will be boosted through this cascaded element-wise product process. As a result, the depth probability produced by the index-based epipolar attention layer can be gradually enhanced, becoming more reliable and accurate. Iterative Depth Estimation Process. Based on the depth probability boosting strategy, each Depth Unit produces an enhanced depth-probability map at iteration . To refine depth estimates symmetrically around the current prediction, we formulate the depth update using a relative depth-candidate offset vector , which allows the network to predict both positive and negative residuals. Specifically, for the first iteration ( ), we uniformly sample depth candidates within the initial range . The depth-candidate vector used for feature matching is defined as , where denotes the sampling interval and is the number of candidates. Since the initial depth map is set to , the relative offset vector in the first iteration is defined as . For subsequent iterations ( ), the depth search range is centered at the previous depth estimate . Accordingly, the depth-candidate vector is updated as , and the corresponding relative offset vector is . Here, the interval shrinks as , enabling progressively finer refinement over iterations, and the number of candidates is . The residual depth map is then computed as the weighted sum of the relative offsets with the probability map along the depth dimension: The refined depth map is updated additively at each iteration: where . is the final depth map of the iterative depth estimation process, from which the Gaussian mean parameters are obtained through unprojection. Enabled by our memory-efficient Warp-Index Epipolar Attention, IDESplat progressively increases the feature resolution over iterations. In the final stage, IDESplat performs warping and similarity computation at the original input resolution of to produce the refined depth map. For the remaining Gaussian parameters, we introduce a window-based Gaussian Focused Module that can filter irrelevant Gaussians and retains the most relevant tokens for attention weight computation. The window-based attention performs pairwise interactions for each Gaussian token, often including numerous irrelevant ones. This dense interaction not only slows down the model but also introduces noise into the attention results. Inspired by , we introduce a Gaussian Focused Layer that reuses the previous layer's Gaussian correlation map to guide attention in the current layer. Formally, for the Gaussian parameters of a given view, , we apply three linear layers to obtain , , and . We use a matrix to record the indices of Gaussian tokens with high similarity. is initialized as an all-ones matrix and is updated after each similarity computation. Then, we compute the Gaussian similarity map as follows: where denotes the SMM operation, and is the similarity map of the -th Gaussian-Focused Layer. Subsequently, we compute the sparse Gaussian attention map for the current -th layer as follows: where denotes the sparsification operation that retains the top half of the weights in each row of the attention map. The positions of the retained weights are recorded as , which stores the selected highly similar Gaussian relations. Finally, the output Gaussian features are reweighted as follows: The Gaussian Focused Module consists of a series of Gaussian Focused Layers connected in sequence. As the layer index increases, becomes progressively sparser, gradually identifying the Gaussian positions that are most important to each query location. This module leverages token similarity across layers to filter out the influence of irrelevant Gaussian features, achieving relational and sufficiently enriched Gaussian feature interactions.