The pipeline of our X-Gaussian is shown in Fig. . Firstly, we design an Angle-pose Cuboid Uniform Initialization (ACUI) to compute the intrinsic and extrinsic matrices from the parameters of X-ray scanner, as illustrated in Fig. (a). Then ACUI uniformly samples 3D points within a cuboid that can completely enclose the scanned object to initialize the center positions of our radiative Gaussian point clouds in Fig. (b). Given a view direction, the 3D point clouds undergo our Differentiable Radiative Rasterization (DRR) to derive the rendered image, as depicted in Fig. (c). In this section, we will introduce our radiative Gaussian point cloud model and DRR processing first and then the ACUI strategy. An object can be represented by a set of basic Gaussian point clouds as where refers to the -th Gaussian point cloud. Its center position, covariance, and opacity are defined as , , and . is represented by a rotation matrix and a scaling matrix as . , , , , and are learnable parameters. Besides these basic attributes, each Gaussian point cloud also employs additional learnable parameters to fit different imaging scenarios, e.g., natural light imaging and X-ray imaging. We first review the original RGB Gaussian point cloud model in natural light imaging. As shown in Fig. (a), the color of a 3D point is represented by spherical harmonics (SH). The point color is anisotropic and changes with the view direction. Each Gaussian point cloud learns to predict the SH coefficients , where each is a set of 3 coefficients corresponding to the RGB components. is the degree of SH. Then the point color at the view direction is derived by where is the SH function that maps points on the sphere to real numbers. Please refer to the supplementary for its detailed formulation. [t] Although 3DGS achieves fast inference speed and good performance in natural light imaging, the RGB Gaussian point cloud model is not suitable for X-ray scenarios due to the fundamental differences between natural light imaging and X-ray imaging. Natural light imaging relies on the reflection off the surface of object. The anisotropic color modeled by SH is view-dependent. e.g., in Fig. (a), the point color is blue from the left viewpoint and green from the right viewpoint. In contrast, X-ray imaging is based on the attenuation when penetrating the object. The degree of attenuation depends on the isotropic radiodensity property. Thus, the radiation intensity of a 3D point is view-independent. In light of the above analysis, we redesign our radiative Gaussian point cloud model. Different from the original 3DGS that uses SH to fit the color information for each point, our model introduces a Radiation Intensity Response Function (RIRF) to predict the radiation intensity of the 3D point. As illustrated in Fig. (b), each Gaussian point cloud learns a feature vector to represent its inherent radiative properties. Subsequently, the radiation intensity of the center point of a 3D Gaussian at any view direction is modeled by RIRF as where the Sigmoid function activates and normalizes the radiation intensity. is a set of constant weights controlling the importance of each component of . Then the set of our radiative Gaussian point clouds is formulated as where denotes the feature vector of the -th Gaussian point cloud. Please note that Eq. excludes the influence of the view direction , which matches the isotropic nature of X-ray imaging. Meanwhile, Eq. is free from the complex computation of SH function. Hence, the forward and backward processes of our X-Gaussian are much faster than those of the original 3DGS. Based on our radiative Gaussian point cloud, we develop a Differentiable Radiative Rasterization (DRR), as shown in Fig. (c). We first summarize the overall DRR processing and then describe its details. DRR is represented as where denotes the rendered image, represents the extrinsic matrix, and refers to the intrinsic matrix. Subsequently, we introduce the details of . To begin with, the possibility value of the -th Gaussian distribution at the 3D point position is formulated as Then we project the 3D Gaussians to the 2D detector plane for subsequent rendering. is firstly transferred from the world coordinate system to the camera coordinate system and then projected to the image coordinate system as where is the camera coordinate of and is the image coordinate of . , , and are the homogeneous coordinates of , , and , respectively. Subsequently, we transfer the 3D covariance matrix to its counterpart in the camera coordinate system as where is the Jacobian of the affine approximation of the projective transformation. is the viewing transformation. We derive them by where represents the distance between the X-ray source and detector. refers to the azimuth angle of the source. Following , we obtain the 2D covariance matrix by skipping the third row and column of . Then the 2D projection is partitioned into non-overlapping tiles. The 3D Gaussians ( , ) are assigned to different tiles according to their 2D projections ( , ), as shown in the left image of Fig. (c). These 3D Gaussians are sorted by the distances to the 2D detector. Then the intensity at pixel is obtained by blending ordered points overlapping the pixel in the corresponding tile as where is the -th intersection 3D point of the X-ray landing on pixel and the Gaussian point clouds in 3D space. is the radiation intensity of . . Eventually, the training objective is the weighted sum of loss and SSIM loss between the rendered and ground-truth projection images as where is a hyperparameter balancing the importances of the two loss terms. By minimizing Eq. , we can optimize the attributes of 3D Gaussians, i.e., in Eq. . is adjusted by the adaptive control . The optimization process is visualized in Fig. and the video file in supplementary. Compared to the RGB rasterization in 3DGS , our DRR avoids the complex computations related to the view direction in the forward and backward processes, thereby enjoying cheaper training costs and faster inference speed. At the beginning of training, we need to initialize the parameters in Eq. for rasterization. Specifically, , , and are randomly initialized. In natural light imaging, the original 3DGS adopts the SfM algorithm to compute the initial , , , and . SfM detects and matches features from multi-view images. It is not suitable for X-ray imaging due to two reasons. Firstly, X-ray images are grayscale and low-contrast. Secondly, different layers of an object may overlap on the same positions of the projection. These two problems degrade the accuracy of feature detection and matching in SfM. Besides, running the SfM algorithm usually requires a long time, which prolongs the training process. To address these issues, we customize an Angle-pose Cuboid Uniform Initialization (ACUI) strategy for circular cone beam X-ray scanning scenario where a scanner emits cone-shaped X-ray beams and captures projections at equal angular intervals. As shown in Fig. (a), ACUI uses the parameters of X-ray scanner to compute the extrinsic matrix and intrinsic matrix as where represents the distance between the X-ray source and the scanned object. The elevation angle of the X-ray source is set to zero and remains unchanged. The next step of ACUI is to initialize the center positions of 3D Gaussians. Although the precise shape of the scanned object is not given at the beginning, the scanning space can be approximated. We set up a cuboid with size (mm) that can completely enclose the object. The center of this cuboid is also the center of the object and the origin of the world coordinate system. We divide this cuboid by a grid with size (voxel). Then we uniformly sample points within the grid at interval as where . Then we use the size and elements of to initialize and . Avoiding running SfM, ACUI allows X-Gaussian to enjoy a faster training speed. [t] [2]