Figure depicts the overall framework of our HDR-GS. To begin with, we use the structure-from-motion (SfM) algorithm to recalibrate the camera parameters of the scene and initialize the Gaussian point clouds, as shown in Fig. (a). Then we propose a Dual Dynamic Range (DDR) Gaussian point cloud model to jointly fit the HDR and LDR colors, as illustrated in Fig. (b). The 3D Gaussians directly use the spherical harmonics (SH) to model the HDR color. Then three independent MLPs are employed to learn the tone-mapping operation in RGB channels. This tone-mapper renders the LDR color from the corresponding HDR color and a controllable exposure time . Subsequently, the LDR and HDR colors are fed into two Parallel Differentiable Rasterization (PDR) processes to render the HDR and LDR images, as depicted in Fig. (c). In this section, we first introduce the DDR point cloud model, then PDR processes, and finally the initialization and optimization of HDR-GS. [t] A scene can be represented by a set of our Dual Dynamic Range (DDR) Gaussian point clouds as where is the number of 3D Gaussians and represents the -th Gaussian. Its center position, covariance, opacity, LDR color, and HDR color are denoted as , , , , and . Besides these attributes, each also contains an exposure time that controls the light intensity of the LDR view and three global-shared MLPs with parameters . is represented by a rotation matrix and a scaling matrix as , , , , and are learnable parameters. The tone-mapping operation models the camera response function (CRF) that non-linearly maps the HDR color into the LDR color as where the exposure time can be read from the metadata of photos. We propose to employ MLPs to learn the tone-mapping process. There are two options. The first option is to directly model , which may result in the vanishing gradient problem because the multiplication operations may cause numerical overflow or underflow. Besides, the multiplication also leads to the nonlinearity and discontinuity of the input signal of MLPs, which also exacerbates the training instability. The second option is following the traditional non-parametric CRF calibration method of Debevec and Malik that transforms from linear domain to logarithmic domain to enhance the stability of MLP training. We adopt the second option. Specifically, in Eq. is inversed and transformed as where log( ) refers to the natural logarithm function and its base is . Subsequently, we take the inverse function of Eq. on both sides and reformulate it as Then we use three MLPs to model the function in RGB channels independently because the RGB colors are tone-mapped by different CRFs. For simplicity, we define the mapping function of our tone-mapper as . Then Eq. is reformulated as here log is modeled by the spherical harmonics (SH) with a set of coefficients . Each is a set of three coefficients corresponding to the RGB components. is the degree of SH. Then at the view direction is derived by where is the SH function that maps 3D points on the sphere to real numbers and exp( ) represents the the exponential function. By substituting Eq. into Eq. , we obtain as here we add a constant bias that helps adjust the SH function to better fit the data. The detailed architecture of our MLP-based tone-mapper is shown in Fig. (b). equals to the process that the RGB channels of log respectively undergo an independent MLP containing a fully connected ( ) layer, a ReLU activation, an layer, and a sigmoid activation to produce the LDR color . The computed HDR color in Eq. and LDR color in Eq. of Gaussian point clouds are fed into two parallel differentiable rasterization processes to jointly render the HDR and LDR views, as shown in Fig. (c). The HDR rasterization and LDR rasterization are represented as where and denote the rendered HDR image and LDR image with the exposure time , and refers to the height and width of the images, represents the extrinsic matrix, and refers to the intrinsic matrix. Please note that we omit and in and for simplicity. Then we introduce the details of the parallel rasterization processes. First of all, we derive the possibility value of the -th 3D Gaussian distribution at the point position as Subsequently, the splatting operation projects the 3D Gaussians to the 2D imaging plane. In this projection process, the center position is firstly transferred from the world coordinate system to the camera coordinate system and then projected to the image coordinate system as where and refer to the image coordinate and camera coordinate of . , , and are the homogeneous versions of , , and , respectively. The 3D covariance is also transferred from the world coordinate system to in the camera coordinate system as where represents the Jacobian matrix of the affine approximation of the projective transformation . is the viewing transformation obtained by taking the first three rows and columns of . Similar to previous works , the 2D covariance matrix is derived by directly skipping the third row and column of . Subsequently, the 2D projection is divided into non-overlapping tiles. The 3D Gaussians ( , ) are assigned to the tiles where their 2D projections ( , ) cover. For each tile, the assigned 3D Gaussians are sorted according to the view space depth. Then the RGB value and at pixel is obtained by blending ordered points overlapping pixel in the corresponding tile as where and is the -th intersection 3D point between the ray, which starts from the optical center of the camera and lands at pixel , and the Gaussian point clouds in 3D space. and are the HDR color and LDR color with exposure time of , respectively. An obstacle to the research of 3DGS-based methods in 3D HDR imaging is that the original multi-view HDR datasets only provide the camera poses in the normalized device coordinate (NDC) system. This NDC system is not suitable for 3DGS-based methods for two main reasons. Firstly, NDC focuses on describing the positions on the 2D screen after perspective projection. However, 3D Gaussian is an explicit 3D representation. 3DGS requires transforming and projecting Gaussian point clouds in 3D space. Secondly, NDC rescales the coordinates into the range [-1, 1] or [0, 1]. The voxel resolution is limited, making it challenging to capture fine details in the scene. Besides, the original datasets do not provide SfM point clouds for the initialization of 3DGS. [t] [2] To address these issues and establish a data foundation for the research of 3DGS-based algorithms in 3D HDR imaging, we use the SfM algorithm to recalibrate the camera parameters and compute the initial positions for 3D Gaussians. The mapping function of SfM is summarized as where represents the number of viewpoints and refers to the LDR image at the -th viewpoint with the exposure time in the multi-view HDR datasets . The intrinsic matrix does not change with the viewpoint. Please note that we take the HDR views under the same exposure time as the inputs of SfM algorithms because SfM is based on multi-view feature detection and matching. Changes in exposure conditions may degrade the accuracy of SfM. Then we use the computed and in Eq. to initialize in Eq. . Other learnable parameters of are randomly initialized. The recalibrated camera pose-image data pairs in Eq. are used to train our HDR-GS with the weighted sum of loss and D-SSIM loss as where is the training batch size and is a hyperparameter. Similar to HDR-NeRF that uses the ground truth CRF correction coefficient to restrict the HDR color on the synthetic scenes, we also enforce a constraint to the rendered HDR image in the -law LDR domain as where is the amount of compression. is the min-max normalization. and denote the rendered and ground-truth HDR image at the -th viewpoint. The overall training loss is where is a hyperparameter that controls the relative importance between and . We do not use in the real scenes since the ground truth HDR images are not provided in the real datasets. Therefore, 