This section initiates with a concise introduction to 3D Gaussian Splatting in Sec . Subsequently, in Sec., we elaborate on how to apply a time-variant deformation network to the superpoints for predicting the rotation and translation to render images at any timestep. To fully exploit the As-Rigid-As-Possible feature within one superpoint, our method also introduces a property reconstruction loss in Sec.. We also illustrate how to aggregate 3D Gaussians into superpoints using a learnable association matrix in this section. Moreover, some details of optimization and inference are explained in Sec. . Finally, our method can support the plugin of an optional non-rigid deformation network, we clarify this in Sec. . An overview of our method is illustrated in Fig. . 3D Gaussian Splatting(3D-GS) propose a novel point-like scene representation, referred to as 3D Gaussians . Each 3D Gaussian is defined by a 3D covariance matrix in world space and a center location , following the expression: For differentiable optimization, the covariance matrix can be break down into a scaling matrix and a rotation matrix , i.e., , where is represented by a 3D vector and is represented by a quaternion . In the process of rendering a 2D image, 3D-GS projects 3D Gaussians onto a 2D image plane using the EWA Splatting algorithm . The corresponding 2D Gaussian, defined by a covariance matrix in camera coordinates centered at , is calculated as follows: where is the world-to-camera transformation matrix, and is the Jacobian matrix of the affine approximation of the projective transformation. After sorting 3D Gaussians by depth, 3D-GS renders the image using volumetric rendering ( -blending). The color of pixel is computed through blending ordered 2D Gaussians, as expressed by: where represents the opacity of each 3D Gaussian, is the RGB color computed using the spherical harmonics coefficients of the 3D Gaussian and the view direction. To optimize a static scene and facilitate real-time rendering, 3D-GS introduced a fast differentiable rasterizer and a training strategy that adaptively controls 3D Gaussians. Further details can be found in 3D-GS , and the loss function utilized by 3D-GS is combined with a D-SSIM term: where is set to . It is evident that 3D-GS is suitable solely for representing static scenes. Therefore, when confronted with a monocular/multi-view video capturing a dynamic scene, we opt to learn 3D Gaussians in a canonical space and the deformation of each 3D Gaussian across the temporal domain under the guidance of aggregated superpoints. Since we assume there are only rigid transformations for every single 3D Gaussian, only the center location and rotation matrix of a 3D Gaussian will vary with time, while other attributes (e.g., opacity , scaling vector , and spherical harmonics coefficients ) remain invariant. To model dynamic scene, we divide 3D Gaussians into superpoints ( disjoint sets). Each superpoint contains several 3D Gaussians, while each 3D Gaussian has only one correspondent superpoint . Following the principle of As-Rigid-As-Possible, 3D Gaussians in the same superpoint should have similar deformation, which can represented by relative translation and rotation based on their center locations and rotation matrices in the canonical space. Therefore, the center location and rotation matrix of the -th 3D Gaussian at time will be: So as to predict the relative translation and rotation of the -th superpoint at time , we directly employ a deformation neural network that takes the timestep and canonical position of the -th superpoint as input, and outputs the relative transformations of superpoints with respect to the canonical space: where denotes the positional encoding: In our experiments, we set for and for . During inference, to further decrease the rendering time, we can pre-compute the relative translation and rotation of superpoints predicted by the deformation network at all timesteps. When rendering novel view images at a new timestep in the training set, the deformation of -th superpoint can be calculated through interpolation: where the linear interpolation weight , and and are the two nearest timesteps in the training dataset. The key insight of superpixels/superpoints lies in that pixels/points with similar properties should be aggregated into one group. Following this idea, given an arbitrary timestep , properties including the position , the relative translation and relative rotation should be similar within one superpoint. We utilize a learnable association matrix to establish the connection between 3D Gaussians and superpoints, where is the number of 3D Gaussians and is the number of superpoints. Notably, only nearest superpoints of each Gaussian should be considered. Therefore, the associated probability between Gaussian and superpoint can be calculated as: where is the set of -nearest superpoints for the -th Gaussian in the canonical space. With the associated probability , the properties of -th superpoint can be reconstructed from the properties of Gaussians: where denotes the properties of -th Gaussian, and means all 3D Gaussians with the -th superpoint in . It is noteworthy that the relative rotation is represented by Lie algebra , which enables linear rotation interpolation. On the other hand, the properties of the -th Gaussian can also be reconstructed through adjacent superpoints: Ultimately, the property reconstruction loss is employed to ensure the consistency between the original properties of Gaussians and the reconstructed properties : where , and denotes the mean square error(MSE). And the more similar the Gaussian properties within the same superpoint are, the smaller this loss will be, thereby fully exploiting the As-Rigid-As-Possible feature. Furthermore, the corresponding superpoint of Gaussian is the superpoint with the highest association probability: It is noteworthy that is the same as the in Eq. . The computation of the overall loss function is: where represents hyper-parameters controlling the weights, with and . We implement our SP-GS with PyTorch, and is a 8-layer MLPs with 256 hidden neurons. The network is trained for a total of 40k iterations, with the initial 3k iterations training without the deformation network as a warm-up process to achieve relatively stable positions and shapes. 3D Gaussians in the canonical space will be initialized after the warm-up training, and for the initialization of superpoints, Gaussians are sampled using the farthest point sampling algorithm, and the canonical positions of superpoints are equal to the centers of the sampled Gaussians. Moreover, the of the learnable association matrix will be initialized as 0.9 if the -th superpoint is initialized with the -th 3D Gaussian. Otherwise, will be initialized as 0.1. Before each iteration, we calculate the canonical position of superpoints with Eq. . The Adam optimizer is employed to optimize our models. For 3D Gaussians, the training strategies are the same as those of 3D-GS unless stated otherwise. For the learnable parameters of , the learning rate undergoes exponential decay, ranging from 1e-3 to 1e-5. The values for Adam's are set to (0.9, 0.999). Given the potential existence of non-rigid deformation in a dynamic scene, another optional non-rigid deformation network is employed to learn the non-rigid deformation of each Gaussian for time : By combining rigid motion with non-rigid deformation, the final center and rotation matrix of Gaussian can be computed as below: For the version incorporating the non-rigid deformation network (abbreviated as SP-GS+NG), the model is initialized with the pretrained model from the version with only and trained for 20k iterations using the loss . Besides, is a 3-layer MLPs with 64 hidden neurons.