Given multi-view RGB images of static scenes, our goal is to achieve efficient and high-fidelity scene geometry reconstruction and rendering quality. Compared to 3DGS, we achieve global consistency in geometry reconstruction while maintaining similar rendering quality. Initially, we improve the modeling of scene geometry attributes by compressing 3D Gaussians into a 2D flat plane representation, which is used to generate plane distance and normal maps, and subsequently converted into unbiased depth maps. We then introduce single-view geometric, multi-view photometric, and geometric consistency loss to ensure global geometry consistency. Additionally, the exposure compensation model further improves reconstruction accuracy. In this section, we will discuss how to transform 3D Gaussians into a 2D flat plane representation. Based on this plane representation, we introduce an unbiased depth rendering method, which will render plane-to-camera distance and normal maps, and can then be converted into depth maps. With geometric depth, distance, and normal maps available, it becomes easier to introduce single-view regularization and multi-view regularization in the following sections. Due to the difficulty in modeling real-world scene geometry attributes such as depth and normals using 3D Gaussian shapes, it's necessary to flatten the 3D Gaussians into 2D flat Gaussians in order to accurately represent the geometry surface of the actual scene. Achieving precise geometry reconstruction and high-quality rendering requires the 2D flat Gaussians to accurately conform to the scene surface. Since the 2D flat Gaussians approximate a local plane, we can conveniently render the depth and normals of the scene. Flattening 3D Gaussian: The covariance matrix of a 3D Gaussian expresses the ellipsoidal shape. Here, represents the orthonormal basis of the ellipsoid's three axes, and the scale factor defines the size along each direction. By compressing the scale factor along specific axes, the Gaussian ellipsoid can be flattened into planes aligned with those axes. We compress the Gaussian ellipsoid along the direction of the minimum scale factor, effectively flattening the ellipsoid into a plane closest to its original shape. According to the method, we directly minimize the minimum scale factor for each Gaussian: Unbiased Depth Rendering: The direction of the minimum scale factor corresponds to the normal of the Gaussian. Due to the ambiguity of the normal direction when there are two directions for the shortest axis, we resolve this issue by using the viewing direction to determine the normal direction. This implies that the angle between the viewing direction and the normal direction should be greater than 90 degrees. The final normal map under the current viewpoint is achieved through -blending: where is the rotation from the camera to the global world. The distance from the plane to the camera center can be expressed as , where is the camera center in the world. is the center of gaussian . The final distance map under the current viewpoint is achieved through -blending: Referencing Fig. , after obtaining the distance and normal of the plane through rendering, we can determine the corresponding depth map by intersecting rays with the plane: where indicates the 2D position on the image plane. is the homogeneous coordinate representation of , and refers to the intrinsic of camera. As shown in Fig. , our method of rendering depth has two major advantages compared to other depth rendering techniques. First, Our depth shapes are consistent with flattened Gaussian shapes, which can truly reflect actual surfaces. Previous methods typically involve directly rendering the depth map based on -blending of the depth Z of Gaussians. Their depth is curved, inconsistent with the flat Gaussian shape, causing geometric conflicts. In contrast, we render the normal and distance maps of the plane first and then convert them into the depth map. Our depth lies on the Gaussian . When the 3D Gaussian flat planes fit the actual surface, the rendered depth can ensure complete consistency with the actual surface. Second, since the accumulation weight for each ray may be less than 1, previous rendering methods are affected by the weight accumulation, potentially resulting in depths that are closer to the camera side and overall underestimated. In contrast, our depth is obtained by dividing the distance from the rendering origin to the plane by the normal, effectively eliminating the influence of weight accumulation coefficients. [htb] The original 3DGS relying solely on image reconstruction loss can easily fall into local overfitting optimization, leading to Gaussian shapes inconsistent with the actual surface. Based on this, we introduce geometric constraints to ensure that the 3D Gaussian fits the actual surface as closely as possible. Local Plane Assumption: Encouraged by these methods , we adopt the assumption of local planarity to constrain the local consistency of depth and normals, meaning a pixel and its neighboring pixels can be considered as an approximate plane. After rendering the depth map, we sample four neighboring points using a fixed template. With these known depths, we compute the plane's normal. This process is repeated for the entire image, generating normals from the rendered depth map. We then minimize the difference between this normal map and the rendered normal map, ensuring geometric consistency between local depth and normals. Image Edge-Aware Single-View Loss: Neighboring pixels may not necessarily fully adhere to the local planarity assumption, especially in edge regions. To address this issue, We use image edges to approximate geometric edges. For a pixel point , we sample four points from the neighboring pixels, such as up, down, left, and right. We project the four sampled depth points into 3D points in the camera coordinate system, then calculate the normal of the local plane for the pixel point is: Finally, we add the single-view normal loss is: where is the image gradient normalized to the range of 0 to 1, is from Equation , and is the set of image pixels. Single-view geometry regularization can maintain consistency between depth and normal geometry, providing fairly accurate initial geometric information. However, due to the irregular discretization of Gaussian point cloud optimization, we found that the geometry structure across multiple views is not entirely consistent. Therefore, it is necessary to introduce multi-view geometry regularization to ensure global consistency of the geometry structure. Multi-View Geometric Consistency: The image loss often suffers from influences such as image noise, blur, and weak textures. In these cases, the geometric solution for photometric consistency is unreliable. Due to the discrete nature of Gaussian properties, we cannot establish a spatially dense or semi-dense SDF field as in SDF methods based on NeRF. We are unable to use spatial smoothness constraints, such as the Eikonal loss , to avoid the influence of unreliable solutions. To mitigate the impact of unreliable geometric solutions and ensure multi-view geometric consistency, we introduce this consistency prior constraint, which helps converge to the correct solution position, enhancing geometric smoothness. We render the normals and the plane distances to the camera for both the reference frame and the neighboring frame. As shown in Fig. , for a specific pixel in the reference frame, the corresponding normal is and the distance is . The pixel in the reference frame can be mapped to a pixel in the neighboring frame through the homography matrix : where and are the relative rotation and translation from the reference frame to the neighboring frame. Similarly, for the pixel in the neighboring frame, we can obtain the normal and the distance to compute the homography matrix . The pixel undergo forward and backward projections between the reference frame and the neig