=== PAPER 1: 2403_11447v1 ===
=== ABSTRACT ===
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has become an emerging tool for dynamic scene reconstruction. However, existing methods focus mainly on extending static 3DGS into a time-variant representation, while overlooking the rich motion information carried by 2D observations, thus suffering from performance degradation and model redundancy. To address the above problem, we propose a novel motion-aware enhancement framework for dynamic scene reconstruction, which mines useful motion cues from optical flow to improve different paradigms of dynamic 3DGS. Specifically, we first establish a correspondence between 3D Gaussian movements and pixel-level flow. Then a novel flow augmentation method is introduced with additional insights into uncertainty and loss collaboration. Moreover, for the prevalent deformation-based paradigm that presents a harder optimization problem, a transient-aware deformation auxiliary module is proposed. We conduct extensive experiments on both multi-view and monocular scenes to verify the merits of our work. Compared with the baselines, our method shows significant superiority in both rendering quality and efficiency. \keywords{Dynamic scene \and 3D Gaussian Splatting \and Optical flow}

=== INTRO (first 2000 chars) ===
In the domain of 3D vision, dynamic scene reconstruction is a crucial task with a wide range of applications, , 3D animation and virtual/augmented reality. This task aims to model the three-dimensional structure and appearance of a scene that changes over time, thereby enabling novel view rendering at arbitrary timestamps. While static scene modeling has witnessed significant progress in recent years, reconstructing dynamic scenes remains an intractable challenge due to the difficulties introduced by motion complexities, topological changes, and spatially or temporally sparse observations. In the past few years, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) has emerged as a remarkable implicit representation for 3D scenes. Researchers have developed various methods to model dynamic scenes with NeRF. Despite their impressive visual quality, the large time overhead stands as a non-negligible obstacle to their practical application. Recently, a new method named 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has attracted substantial attention from the research community. 3DGS gets rid of the expensive deep neural networks and ray-tracing rendering of NeRF-based methods by introducing the explicit 3D Gaussian representation and efficient point-based rasterization. As a strong competitor to NeRF, 3DGS achieves comparable performance in novel view synthesis while boosting the rendering speed to a real-time level. It is then a straightforward but challenging task to extend the static 3DGS to a time-variant representation for dynamic content. Some pioneers have tried different strategies, , iteration or deformation, to address this problem. However, these 3DGS-based works typically focus on the design of dynamic modeling. They regard frames as discrete samples to fit time-dependent trajectories or deformations, while overlooking the rich motion cues underneath sequential 2D observations. Since dynamic 3DGS involves explicit moving and deforming of Gaussians, it presents a tough under-constrained problem to 

=== METHOD ===
For the dynamic reconstruction task, we propose a novel enhancement framework that fully exploits the motion cues from optical flow to improve existing dynamic 3DGS methods. First, we establish a correspondence between 3D Gaussian movements and pixel-level flows (). Then we introduce our flow augmentation with additional insights into the uncertainty during training and collaboration with other supervisions (). For the deformation-based paradigm that presents a harder optimization problem, an extra transient-aware deformation auxiliary module is proposed (). Finally, we present the training process of our framework (). The pipeline of our method is illustrated in . How to effectively model the temporal 3D scene flow is the core problem of dynamic scene reconstruction. In the context of 3DGS, such scene flow can be intuitively mapped to the movements of the Gaussian centers. To align those movements with 2D optical flow derived from image sequences, a dense cross-dimensional motion correspondence has to be established. Considering the success of render-based depth supervision in NeRF , it seems a plausible solution to projecting the scene flow into the image plane using the differentiable renderer of 3DGS. While the -blending in rendering can naturally deal with transparency and occlusion relationship, we found in practice that such render-based supervision presents poor performance when applied to optical flow, and sometimes is even prone to collapse of optimization. The phenomenon can be explained from two views. On one side, unlike depth, optical flow is defined and predicted in 2D image plane, resulting in a non-negligible gap of render-based flow supervision (see for a more detailed illustration). On the other side, the long-distance (theoretically infinite) Gaussian influence makes the optimization vulnerable to noise and numerical instability. To address the above issues, we propose a more effective way to build the cross-dimensional bridge by performing foreground Gaussian searching and reprojecting. Specifically, when optimizing the motion for timestamp , we start from the depth map of the scene produced as a byproduct of rendering at the last timestamp. For iterative 3DGS, the scene at is already successfully optimized. For deformation-based 3DGS, the scene is also generally well modeled after the initial coarse stage of training. Therefore, the depth map is moderately accurate in both paradigms. Then a pixel's 3D location can be found via unprojection with the help of its depth value. We treat the nearest Gaussians around that 3D location as the foreground candidates for motion optimization. For a one-to-one correspondence, the Gaussian with the maximum contribution over this location () can be selected. However, to make it more robust and efficient, we perform a ``soft select'' to use all nearby candidates along with their contributions in one iteration. All the 3D center of the candidates are reprojected into image plane at the current timestamp (camera view may change in a monocular scene), producing a set of 2D flows with gradients retained for motion optimization later: . It is worth noting that the proposed method is not a few-point approximation of the flow-rendering process mentioned earlier: all the foreground candidates of one pixel will be supervised by the same exact 2D optical flow. Once the projected scene flows for each pixel are obtained, we align them with the optical flow prior produced by a pretrained predictor from adjacent frames. Meanwhile, since the flow indicates the dynamic parts of a scene, it is also a useful tool to introduce dynamic awareness for other supervision signals. Generally, an or loss between the projected and ground-truth flow can take effect as in previous works . However, uncertainty in this process tends to hinder the optimization. On the one hand, flow predictor and camera calibration have their inherent errors, especially for monocular scenes with camera shake. On the other hand, the pixel-level flow is not always consistent with the motion of a Gaussian center, considering the existence of large Gaussians and complex movements involving scaling and rotation. To handle the above issues, we propose a new flow loss that takes uncertainty into consideration. Inspired by an effective solution in object detection , we use the KL-Divergence as the loss function for flow alignment: It is intended to minimize the KL-Divergence between two distributions of flow and , which is finally derived to be a weighted difference between the flow prior and the prediction , along with a regularizer to avoid trivial solutions. We use the normalized Gaussian contribution as mentioned in in the formulation of the variance : where is the learnable view-dependent confidence. Overall, we expect that a Gaussian with less contribution and more uncertainty will produce a larger variance so that the flow loss term for that pixel can adaptively become lower. Aside from direct motion supervision, we also leverage the flow prior to generate the ``dynamic map/mask'', thereby offering dynamic awareness to existing regularizations during optimization. As the fundamental supervision, the pixel-level reconstruction (color) loss can be augmented with our dynamic map. We obtain the normalized magnitude of the 2D flow map and then weigh the prediction and ground truth with it before calculating the image loss. Therefore, the flow prior plays the role of an attention map and guides the optimizer to attach more importance to regions with larger movements of the current frame. The refined color loss is given by where is the dynamic map, and means Hadamard product. We use a hyperparameter to balance the dynamic-aware term and the original loss, in case the flow predictor fails to produce meaningful results for tiny motions. Moreover, in the iterative D-3DGS , a physical loss is applied to a local region of Gaussians to encourage their motion similarity. In order not to mix up the dynamic parts with the static background, a 3D foreground mask (jointly optimized using a segmentation loss) is adopted in . However, we argue that a constantly updating dynamic mask is more suitable to distinguish between static and dynamic Gaussians, because the definition of the so-called ``foreground'' relies on 2D segmentation priors, and is usually quite different from the desired dynamic region. Therefore, we design a 3D dynamic mask based on the dynamic map . Using the process described in , it is easy to find a dense correspondence for the pixel-level motion magnitude. We combine the flow information from all viewpoints of the current frame and set a threshold to get the dynamic labels for all Gaussians. In this way, we upgrade to a more accurate dynamic-aware version with no extra cost like the segmentation. Compared with iterative 3DGS, the deformation-based paradigm tries to solve a more difficult optimization problem where scenes at all timestamps are jointly modeled. The aforementioned flow augmentation can still be applied to it, but the performance gain is somehow minor. We blame this on its different modeling process. In the iterative paradigm, the well-optimized scene at can be viewed as a fixed anchor, with which the flow priors guide Gaussians to a clear destination at the current time . However, in deformation-based 3DGS, neither scenes at and are fixed. Without the anchor, simply optimizing the relative motion of the two has ambiguities and can hardly achieve an ideal effect. Therefore, auxiliary designs are essential to enhance the deformation. Considering the HexPlane structure of our baseline for deformation-based 3DGS, we propose to explicitly inject transient information into the time-variant voxel features. A velocity field is employed to decode the position- and time-dependent feature of each Gaussian into a 3D instantaneous velocity . Through dense correspondence searching (), is aligned with optical flow divided by the time interval 
