=== PAPER 2: 2404_03202v5 ===
=== ABSTRACT ===
% \vspace{-0.1cm} Photorealistic reconstruction relying on 3D Gaussian Splatting has shown promising potential in various domains. However, the current 3D Gaussian Splatting system only supports radiance field reconstruction using undistorted perspective images. In this paper, we present OmniGS, a novel omnidirectional Gaussian splatting system, to take advantage of omnidirectional images for fast radiance field reconstruction. Specifically, we conduct a theoretical analysis of spherical camera model derivatives in 3D Gaussian Splatting. According to the derivatives, we then implement a new GPU-accelerated omnidirectional rasterizer that directly splats 3D Gaussians onto the equirectangular screen space for omnidirectional image rendering. We realize differentiable optimization of the omnidirectional radiance field without the requirement of cube-map rectification or tangent-plane approximation. Extensive experiments conducted in egocentric and roaming scenarios demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art reconstruction quality and high rendering speed using omnidirectional images. The code will be publicly available at \url{https://github.com/liquorleaf/OmniGS}. %To benefit the research community, t once the paper is published.

=== INTRO (first 2000 chars) ===
Reconstructing three-dimensional (3D) structures of observed environments plays an important role in many applications, such as environmental monitoring, virtual reality, localization, navigation, path planning, and other high-level perception tasks. Recent progress in this realm has sought to harness the information contained in large field-of-view (FoV) images for efficient reconstruction, especially omnidirectional images which are able to capture the entire environment at each shot. In order to achieve photorealistic reconstruction and enable immersive scene roaming using omnidirectional images, several approaches, such as 360Roam , 360FusionNerf , and PaniGRF have explored the utilization of the neural radiance field (NeRF) technique . Unlike traditional methods that focus on precise geometry reconstruction, NeRF-based methods employ multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) to implicitly model the scene. It accumulates density and view-dependent color per ray, which are regressed from the MLPs, for image synthesis. Meanwhile, the MLP parameters are optimized by minimizing the photorealistic loss between rendered images and corresponding training images. Since such a rendering and optimization process requires millions of ray samplings, NeRF-based methods suffer from long training or inference time to model omnidirectional radiance field. Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) effectively addresses the limitation of NeRF by introducing 3D Gaussians to explicitly represent radiance field. Each 3D Gaussian is a point associated with certain attributes, i.e. position, color, scale, rotation, and opacity. For rendering, the elliptical weighted average (EWA) splatting algorithm is applied to project and rasterize 3D Gaussians onto the screen space. Benefiting from the highly efficient rendering process, 3DGS significantly reduces training and inference time in high-quality radiance field reconstruction, having great potential in real-time applications . Nevertheless, the curre

=== METHOD ===
We illustrate an overview of OmniGS in . Reconstruction starts from a set of SfM-calibrated equirectangular images , each of which has a pose . We obtain initial 3D Gaussians from the colored sparse SfM point cloud . We set their rotation, scale and opacity to unit values as does, then begin a series of optimization iterations. For each iteration, we choose one view from the randomly shuffled , render from to get , then compute and the corresponding backward gradients. After densifying based on the following strategies, we advance the optimizer by one step to optimize all 3D Gaussians. We apply a gradient-based densification control strategy similar to . But instead of using the perspective gradients, we judge whether to densify a Gaussian in sight of its gradient over omnidirectional screen-space location, i.e. , which is derived and recorded during the calculation process in . In detail, for Gaussians with a large enough gradient, if their scales are too large or too small, then they are going to be split or cloned respectively to densify , enhancing its ability to represent details. We also prune the Gaussians whose scale or screen-space radius is too large, intending to boost the details. Additionally, opacities of all Gaussians also contribute to the densification control. Gaussians with an excessively small opacity are pruned as well. Large opacities are reset to encourage more densification. We execute the densification control process periodically until reaching a certain number of iterations. We conclude the above reconstruction pipeline in .
