=== PAPER 8: 2503_07152v1 ===
=== ABSTRACT ===
Three-dimensional scene generation is crucial in computer vision, with applications spanning autonomous driving, gaming and the metaverse. Current methods either lack user control or rely on imprecise, non-intuitive conditions. In this work, we propose a method that uses scene graphs—an accessible, user-friendly control format—to generate outdoor 3D scenes. We develop an interactive system that transforms a sparse scene graph into a dense BEV (Bird's Eye View) Embedding Map, which guides a conditional diffusion model to generate 3D scenes that match the scene graph description. During inference, users can easily create or modify scene graphs to generate large-scale outdoor scenes. We create a large-scale dataset with paired scene graphs and 3D semantic scenes to train the BEV embedding and diffusion models. Experimental results show that our approach consistently produces high-quality 3D urban scenes closely aligned with the input scene graphs. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first approach to generate 3D outdoor scenes conditioned on scene graphs.

=== INTRO (first 2000 chars) ===
After receiving paper reviews, authors may optionally submit a rebuttal to address the reviewers' comments, which will be limited to a one page PDF file. Please follow the steps and style guidelines outlined below for submitting your author response. The author rebuttal is optional and, following similar guidelines to previous conferences, is meant to provide you with an opportunity to rebut factual errors or to supply additional information requested by the reviewers. It is NOT intended to add new contributions (theorems, algorithms, experiments) that were absent in the original submission and NOT specifically requested by the reviewers. You may optionally add a figure, graph, or proof to your rebuttal to better illustrate your answer to the reviewers' comments. Per a passed 2018 PAMI-TC motion, reviewers should refrain from requesting significant additional experiments for the rebuttal or penalize for lack of additional experiments. Authors should refrain from including new experimental results in the rebuttal, especially when not specifically requested to do so by the reviewers. Authors may include figures with illustrations or comparison tables of results reported in the submission/supplemental material or in other papers. Just like the original submission, the rebuttal must maintain anonymity and cannot include external links that reveal the author identity or circumvent the length restriction. The rebuttal must comply with this template (the use of sections is not required, though it is recommended to structure the rebuttal for ease of reading). Author responses must be no longer than 1 page in length including any references and figures. Overlength responses will simply not be reviewed. This includes responses where the margins and formatting are deemed to have been significantly altered from those laid down by this style guide. Note that this guide already sets figure captions and references in a smaller font.

=== METHOD ===
We first discuss the formulation of a scene graph in Sec. . We then introduce how to generate a 3D outdoor scene conditioned on a scene graph in Sec. . In Sec. , we describe how the proposed method facilitates the convenient creation of 3D scenes. Formally, a scene graph is characterized by its nodes and edges as . The set of nodes consists of two types (i.e., ): a) Instance Nodes ( ) that represent countable objects with standard labels defined in , such as vehicles and pedestrians. Each node is associated with a feature vector , where denotes the node attributes with dimension , and represents a coordinate specifying its center position in the BEV map. b) Scene Road Nodes ( ) that define the structure of the road and other global background information of the scene in one node, i.e., . We further construct the graph structure by defining two types of edges to capture essential relationships: a) Physical Proximity: For any two instance nodes , we define an edge if the Euclidean distance is smaller than a threshold . b) Road Connectivity: For any instance node and the singleton road node , an edge is created for the connects to the road structure. In practice, we use the simplified graph as control signals to ease user interaction, where each instance node contains only its semantic label and an approximate 2D position represented as a patch index. Also, the scene road node is represented by the road type. Given a 2D scene graph, our method aims at generating a 3D semantic scene that aligns with the structure defined by the scene graph. In the following, we first convert the scene graph into a dense 2D embedding using a Graph Neural Network (GNN). Next, we synthesize a plausible 2D scene map by training a 2D diffusion model conditioned on the scene graph embedding. Finally, we use a conditional 3D diffusion model to generate the final 3D outdoor scene given the 2D scene map. Scene Graph Neural Network. The scene Graph Neural Network (Fig. ) aims to generate node embeddings for scene graphs that capture both local structural and global context information. Particularly, we utilize Graph Attention Network (GAT) for GNN implementation. Given a graph , with adjacency matrix that encodes the connectivity between nodes, the node embeddings are computed by a two-layer GAT for node in the graph. To incorporate global context into the node embeddings, we concatenate each node’s embedding with a pooled global embedding as the final embedding, i.e., where denotes concatenation, is a graph global mean pooling operation , and is a multi-layer perceptron. We name the output embedding as Context-aware node embedding (CANE). We train the GNN with two objectives: the auxiliary tasks (Fig. ) and the downstream task (Fig. ). For auxiliary tasks, we apply edge reconstruction loss as in Graph Auto-encoder (GAE) and node classification loss, given by where is binary cross-entropy, is node-wise cross-entropy loss, and, for being sigmoid function. The first term of is to reconstruct the global edge structure of the scene, specifically the adjacency matrix . The second term of is to classify each node into the original category. The auxiliary tasks ensure that the network learns both structural relationships and node-specific features, effectively capturing both local and global information in the CANE. For downstream task, embeddings are used as inputs to compute BEV Embedding Map (BEM, Fig. ) which serves as condition for the sequential diffusion model in the next phase of diffusion. These embeddings are passed to an allocation module, defined by where is the output BEM with height , width , and channel dimension . The binary map is expanded along the channel dimension to to enable element-wise multiplication with the node embedding . In the implementation, we perform the inference by sampling position from an MLP-based localization head, i.e., where is the temperature for Gumbel softmax . While in the training process of the diffusion model, we replace the in by the ground truth position . The localization head is trained after the diffusion model training. As a result, the allocation module effectively converts irregular and sparse graph representation into dense 2D map, i.e., BEM, which offers better compatibility with the subsequent 2D diffusion process. [!t] [width = 0.99 ] ./fig/main_comparison_2_iccv.pdf 2D Map Discrete Diffusion (Fig. ). Given a scene graph, there may be multiple plausible 2D maps that align with its structure. To model this variability, we use a diffusion model that converts the sparse scene graph embedding into a dense 2D map representation. Formally, the 2D Map Diffusion refines the sparse BEM into a dense 2D map, , where is the semantic class number. We apply the standard discrete diffusion for 2D map generation. In the forward process, the 2D map is gradually corrupted in timesteps using a transition matrix , which adds noise as . This process can also be represented using a cumulative matrix , allowing us to sample directly from the original map , where represents a categorical distribution. In the reverse diffusion stage, a model learns to reverse the noise process, predicting the less-noised map from the noisy map , using as guidance: The model is trained by minimizing the KL divergence between the forward process and the learned reverse process. The loss function is defined as: where controls the weight of the auxiliary term for better reconstruction. During inference, we start from random noise and use the learned reverse diffusion to generate a dense 2D map , guided by the BEM . This refined map provides a more complete spatial layout for further 3D scene generation. We train the GNN and the 2D map diffusion model using a loss . 3D Scene Discrete Diffusion (Fig. ). We convert the generated 2D map into a dense 3D scene using a discrete diffusion process similar to the 2D Map Diffusion. The initial 2D map , generated from the previous diffusion step, is used as a condition to guide the generation of the 3D scene. We define the 3D scene as , where , , and are the dimensions of the 3D scenes and represents semantic categories. The 3D diffusion follows the same forward and reverse diffusion steps as in the 2D case but operates on the 3D scene grid. Specifically, a learnable model predicts each denoised state from , conditioned on the input 2D map , given by, where is an up-scaling function. Furthermore, the training loss follows the same form as , given by, During inference, the network generates the final 3D scene by starting from a noisy 3D state and applying the reverse diffusion process conditioned on . Specifically, each step of the reverse diffusion process is performed by sampling as . This produces a fully detailed 3D scene aligned with the spatial layout of the 2D map. [!t] [t] [width = 1 ] ./fig/diversity_2.pdf We develop an interactive control system (Fig. ) that prioritizes user-directed scene graph manipulation. The core component is a graphical interface where users can precisely construct and modify scene graphs through intuitive operations such as node addition, deletion, and position adjustment. This direct manipulation ensures fine-grained control over the scene generation. Additionally, users can provide text prompts, which are processed by large language models to generate corresponding scene graphs (Fig. ). These scene graphs are then used as input to our method to generate the final 3D scenes. Details on the design of system-level prompts can be found in the supplementary materials.
