=== PAPER 10: 2505_02175v1 ===
=== ABSTRACT ===
Recovering 3D information from scenes via multi-view stereo reconstruction (MVS) and novel view synthesis (NVS) is inherently challenging, particularly in scenarios involving sparse-view setups. The advent of $3$D Gaussian Splatting ($3$DGS) enabled real-time, photorealistic NVS. Following this, $2$D Gaussian Splatting ($2$DGS) leveraged perspective accurate $2$D Gaussian primitive rasterization to achieve accurate geometry representation during rendering, improving 3D scene reconstruction while maintaining real-time performance. Recent approaches have tackled the problem of sparse real-time NVS using $3$DGS within a generalizable, MVS-based learning framework to regress $3$D Gaussian parameters. Our work extends this line of research by addressing the challenge of generalizable sparse $3$D reconstruction and NVS jointly, and manages to perform successfully at both tasks. We propose an MVS-based learning pipeline that regresses 2DGS surface element parameters in a feed-forward fashion to perform $3$D shape reconstruction and NVS from sparse-view images. We further show that our generalizable pipeline can benefit from preexisting foundational multi-view deep visual features. The resulting model attains the \textbf{state-of-the-art results on the DTU sparse 3D reconstruction benchmark in terms of Chamfer distance to ground-truth}, as-well as state-of-the-art NVS. It also demonstrates strong generalization on the BlendedMVS and Tanks and Temples datasets. We note that our model outperforms the prior state-of-the-art in feed-forward sparse view reconstruction based on volume rendering of implicit representations, while offering an almost \textbf{2 orders of magnitude higher inference speed}. Code will be made available at \href{https://shubhendu-jena.github.io/SparSplat/}{https://shubhendu-jena.github.io/SparSplat/} %utilizes prior training data to perform $3$D shape reconstruction and NVS from sparse-view images using $2$DGS. Our approach builds on the foundational models ($2$D and $3$D), such as DinoV2, which provides rich 2D semantic monocular features and MASt3R, which utilizes dense local features to establish dense pairwise correspondences between multi-view images. By leveraging these features to predict $2$DGS parameters, we achieve significantly faster $3$D reconstruction compared to existing generalizable implicit methods and attain state-of-the-art results on the DTU dataset for both 3D reconstruction and NVS and also demonstrate strong generalization on the BlendedMVS dataset.

=== INTRO (first 2000 chars) ===
After receiving paper reviews, authors may optionally submit a rebuttal to address the reviewers' comments, which will be limited to a one page PDF file. Please follow the steps and style guidelines outlined below for submitting your author response. The author rebuttal is optional and, following similar guidelines to previous conferences, is meant to provide you with an opportunity to rebut factual errors or to supply additional information requested by the reviewers. It is NOT intended to add new contributions (theorems, algorithms, experiments) that were absent in the original submission and NOT specifically requested by the reviewers. You may optionally add a figure, graph, or proof to your rebuttal to better illustrate your answer to the reviewers' comments. Per a passed 2018 PAMI-TC motion, reviewers should refrain from requesting significant additional experiments for the rebuttal or penalize for lack of additional experiments. Authors should refrain from including new experimental results in the rebuttal, especially when not specifically requested to do so by the reviewers. Authors may include figures with illustrations or comparison tables of results reported in the submission/supplemental material or in other papers. Just like the original submission, the rebuttal must maintain anonymity and cannot include external links that reveal the author identity or circumvent the length restriction. The rebuttal must comply with this template (the use of sections is not required, though it is recommended to structure the rebuttal for ease of reading). Author responses must be no longer than 1 page in length including any references and figures. Overlength responses will simply not be reviewed. This includes responses where the margins and formatting are deemed to have been significantly altered from those laid down by this style guide. Note that this guide already sets figure captions and references in a smaller font.

=== METHOD ===
Given a few color images , where , our goal is to obtain a 3D reconstruction of the observed scene or object efficiently. This reconstruction entails a 3D triangle mesh and novel view synthesis capability. We achieve this objective by learning a generalizable feed-forward model that can map the input images to planar surface elements of any target view in a single forward pass (Fig.). These D primitives enable efficient depth and color volume rendering via perspective accurate Gaussian Splatting . An explicit mesh can be obtained from the splatted depths through the TSDF algorithm , while color rendering enables real time novel view synthesis. 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) represents a scene as a set of 3D anisotropic Gaussians , each defined by centroid , scale , rotation , opacity , and SH-encoded color . The covariance is: It can be projected to screen space via and : Here, is the world-to-camera transformation matrix, and is the local affine transformation matrix that projects the Gaussian onto the image plane. Rendering projects pre-ordered Gaussians to the image plane and blends them via -compositing: where the adjusted opacity is: Here, is the pixel and is the Gaussian splat centre's ( ) projection onto the 2D image plane. 3D primitives can induce ambiguity when viewed from different viewpoints. The 2D footprint can correspond to multiple possible 3D primitive configurations. Additionally, the perspective affine approximation used to project 3D Gaussian primitives onto the image plane becomes less accurate as points move away from the primitive center. These elements lead to 3D inconsistencies that 2D primitives help alleviating. 2D Gaussian Splatting (2DGS) represents primitives as planar 2D Gaussians, improving multi-view depth consistency while maintaining novel view performance. Each Gaussian in screen space is defined as: where and are the UV coordinates of the ray-splat intersection on the local tangent plane of the splat, and is the screen space pixel coordinate. The ray-splat intersection has a closed form expression involving the homography matrix: where , , are learnable scaling factors, and , are tangential vectors that can be derived from the learnable splat rotation , and is the splat's learnable center in world space. Thereafter, as in Equ. with a learnable opacity parameter per splat. Alpha-blending is performed as in Equ. to get the rendered color from the depth-ordered primitives, using learnable colors per splat. This approach improves multi-view depth consistency and 3D reconstruction quality by accurately modeling perspective in splat rendering, as opposed to the 3DGS based geometry modelling. Given input images and their camera poses (encompassing 3D rotation and translation), our model predicts a pixel-aligned 2DGS Gaussian parameter map for a given target view : For test time reconstruction, TSDF depth fusion is performed on mean splatted depths. Each depth is splatted for view using the set of Gaussian primitives made of the inferred splat map . The Gaussian primitive attribute prediction pipeline follows the architecture in , and we refer the reader to this latter for exhaustive details. An FPN network predicts a 2D feature map for each input image . Homography based warping is used to warp feature maps to the target view using the relative poses / . Two parallel stages follow: a deepMVS branch and a pixel aligned prediction branch. The former follows classical deep depth from multi-view stereo architectures . Features are merged into a cost volume, which is processed into a probability volume with a 3D convolutional network, leading to a depth prediction. In the second branch, features are pooled into a target feature map . A 2D convolutional network and an MLP map this feature map to Gaussian primitive attributes . The unprojected deepMVS depth via camera intrinsics provides the 3D position attribute of the splats , thus forming the final full attribute map . We also follow the hybrid rendering introduced in . MVSFormer++ integrates 2D foundation model DINOv2 with cross-view attention and adaptive cost volume regularization to improve transformer-based Multi-View Stereo. In order to enrich the initial features of our pipeline, We follow this line to integrate and experiment with two types of deep visual features, namely monocular features from DINOv2 and multi-view features from MASt3R , and show that MASt3R's features enrich cost volume (which are 4D tensors that store matching costs across multiple views to estimate depth) features, thereby making the predicted depth, and consequently, the mesh reconstruction more accurate. MASt3R is a state-of-the-art 3D foundation model trained on a large set of data, which learns to establish correspondences in feature space between pairs of images of the same scene. MASt3R takes two input images and predicts a dense pointmap and stereo feature image corresponding for each input image: where . We run master on all pairs made with our input images. Subsequently, we can define the feature of an image as the concatenation of the image with all its feature maps obtained in combination with the other views: . For , this writes . A simple way to inject this feature representation into our Gaussian attribute regression pipeline is by feeding it as input to the FPN network. Deep foundational monocular features are more straightforward to inject in our 2DGS feed-forward regression pipeline. For DINOv2 , we extract the image feature map and up-sample it to the resolution of the input: where . The final feature input to the FPN network is the concatenation of the image and its monocular feature . Our model is trained in an end-to-end fashion using multi-view RGB images and ground truth depth as supervision, while deep feature networks ( ) are frozen for computational efficiency. We follow the multi-stage training procedure in . A target image is differentiably reconstructed from neighboring input views. To optimize the generalizable framework, we employ a combination of the mean squared error (MSE) loss ( ), structural similarity index (SSIM) loss ( ), perceptual loss between groundtruth image and rendered image ( ). Differently from , we employ an depth loss ( ) between groundtruth depth and predicted depth. Also differently, we use a depth distortion ( ) and normal consistency ( ) losses to regularize our 2DGS output. The overall loss for each stage of the coarse-to-fine optimization framework described in is formulated as: where and are defined as: Here, and are the depths of splats along the viewing direction. is the surface normal of the splat, and is the normal from the rendered depth map. and are the blending weights. The depth distortion loss , as introduced initially in , helps concentrating the weight distribution along the rays. The normal consistency loss, , ensures that the 2D splats are locally aligned with the actual surface geometry. Please refer to for more details regarding these losses. Due to our MVS architecture being pyramidal in design, represents the loss for the -th stage, with , , , , and denoting the respective weights of each loss term. The overall loss function is the sum of the losses from all stages, expressed as: where represents the weighting factor for the loss at stage (detailed in supplementary material). It is worth noting that unlike implicit methods which are unable to render full images and depths during training due to computation time constraints, we are able to apply the training losses on the entire images on account of the efficient Gaussian Splatting based rendering.
